# Analysis-of-endogenous-human-milk-peptides-between-preterm-and-term-birth
Publication: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4336528/pdf/nut145425.pdf

Objectives: Hundreds of naturally occurring milk peptides are present in term human milk. Preterm milk is produced before complete maturation of the mammary gland, which could change milk synthesis and secretion processes within the mammary gland, leading to differences in protein expression and enzymatic activity, thereby resulting in an altered peptide profile. This study examines differences in peptides present between milk from women delivering at term and women delivering prematurely. Nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was employed to identify naturally occurring peptides and compare their abundances between term and preterm human milk samples at multiple time-points over lactation. Term milk samples were collected from eight mothers and preterm milk was collected from fourteen mothers. The 28 preterm and 32 term human milk samples were divided into four groups based on day of collection (<14; 14–28; 29–41; 42–58 days).

Statistical analysis. The total numbers of peptides identified were summarized for each gestational age group (preterm vs. term) and at each lactation stage group (<14, 15–28, 29–41, and 42-58 days). Poisson regression was applied to model the number of peptide as a function of maturation and lactation stage. For studying instrument response (peak area) of individual peptides, peptides that were absent in more than 75% of the 28 preterm and 32 term samples were omitted. The peak area of all samples were transformed into log scale. A likelihood ratio tests in a linear mixed-effects model was used to calculate the effect of gestational age at birth and day of lactation on the abundance of peptides, studying main effect of maturation and lactation stage, the interaction effect and then effect of lactation time for preterm and term samples separately, to determine which peptides were significantly affected by maturation and lactation. Multiple comparisons were corrected using the Benjamini Hochberg False Discovery Rate control method. All statistical analyses were conducted in R. 
Result:
Preterm milk contains more peptide sequences. The mean number of peptides in preterm samples was significantly higher than in term samples (359 ± 8.33 vs. 268 ± 9.78, P = 5.41x10-7). The peptide counts were significantly higher in first three lactation periods for preterm compared with term milk. The total number of peptides was significantly affected by term vs. preterm birth (P = 4.28x10-10). Neither preterm nor term milk showed a significant change over time in the number of peptides present until the last lactation stage. The effect of lactation stage became significant when the last stage was reached (P = 7.57x10-5). The interaction of maturation (term vs. preterm birth) and lactation stage also became significant at the last lactation stage (P = 7.56x10-13). 
Peptide intensity variation. The mean total peptide intensity (peak area) was higher in preterm milk samples than in term milk samples (P = < 2.00x10-16), although deviations from the means were large. The change over time in the mean intensity of peptides was not statistically significant in preterm or term milks while the interaction term was significant in the last lactation stage (P = 2.86x10-5). 
Nearly one hundred and fifty peptides were significantly affected by gestational age at birth, and 65 peptides were significantly affected by the interaction between gestational age at birth and lactation period. 

